Hostname:v2 docs (#28123)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/guides/server/hostname2.adoc

Author: Addressed.

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Configuring the hostname (v2)"
summary="Learn how to configure the frontend and backchannel endpoints exposed by {project_name}."
includedOptions="hostname hostname-* proxy"

> deniedCategories="hostname_v1">

Reviewer: Actually, one more thing. I think we need to put `hostname_v2` in the denied categories in the old hostname guide.

We should also rename to old hostname guide to include "(v1)" at the end and add some deprecation note in the beginning.

With this configuration, the server respects the value set by the Forwarded header. This also implies that all endpoints are dynamically resolved.

The `proxy-headers` option can be also used to resolve the URL partially dynamically when `hostname` option is not specified as a full URL. For example:

<@kc.start parameters="--hostname my.keycloak.org --proxy-headers forwarded"/>

In this case, scheme, port and context path are resolved dynamically from X-Forwarded-* headers, while hostname is statically defined as `my.keycloak.org`.

WARNING: If either `forwarded` or `xforwarded` is selected, make sure your reverse proxy properly sets and overwrites the `Forwarded` or `X-Forwarded-*` headers respectively. To set these headers, consult the documentation for your reverse proxy. Misconfiguration will leave {project_name} exposed to security vulnerabilities.

== Exposing the Administration Console on a separate hostname

If you wish to expose the Admin Console on a different host, you can do so with the following command:

<@kc.start parameters="--hostname https://my.keycloak.org --hostname-admin https://admin.my.keycloak.org:8443"/>

> This allows you to access Keycloak at `https://my.keycloak.org` and the Keycloak Admin Console at `https://admin.my.keycloak.org:8443`, while the backend continues to use `https://my.keycloak.org`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows you to access {project_name} at `https://my.keycloak.org` and the Admin Console at `https://admin.my.keycloak.org:8443`, while the backend continues to use `https://my.keycloak.org`.
```

NOTE: Keep in mind that hostname and proxy options do not change the ports on which the server listens. Instead it changes only the ports of static resources like JavaScript and CSS links, OIDC well-known endpoints, redirect URIs, etc. that will be used in front of the proxy. You need to use HTTP configuration options to change the actual ports the server is listening on. Refer to the <@links.server id="all-config"/> for details.

== Background - server endpoints

> {project_name} exposes several endpoints, each with a different purpose. They are typically used for communication among applications or for managing the Keycloak server itself. We recognize 3 main endpoint groups:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{project_name} exposes several endpoints, each with a different purpose. They are typically used for communication among applications or for managing the server. We recognize 3 main endpoint groups:
```

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="hostname:v2 - configuring hostname the new way"
summary="Learn how to configure the frontend and backchannel endpoints exposed by {project_name}."

> includedOptions="hostname hostname-* proxy">

Author: Addressed.

== The importance of setting up the hostname option

By default, Keycloak mandates the configuration of the `--hostname` option and does not dynamically resolve URLs. This is a security measure.

Keycloak freely discloses its own URLs, for instance, through the OIDC Discovery endpoint, or as part of the password reset link in an email. If the hostname was dynamically interpreted from a hostname header, it could provide a potential attacker with an opportunity to manipulate a URL in the email, redirect a user to the attacker's fake domain, and steal sensitive data such as action tokens, passwords, etc.

By explicitly setting the `--hostname`, we avoid a situation where tokens could be issued by a fraudulent issuer. In this context, the Keycloak server can be initiated using the following command:

[source,bash]
----

> kc.sh start --hostname my.keycloak.org

Reviewer 2: On this and similar examples don't we need to call out that ssl key material must be provided?

> kc.sh start --hostname my.keycloak.org

Reviewer: We should be using `<@kc.start ...` instead of hardcoded `kc.sh`.

Author: Addressed.

----

== Defining specific parts of the hostname option

> As demonstrated in the previous example, the scheme and port are not explicitly required. In such cases, {project_name} automatically handles these aspects. For instance, the server would be accessible at https://my.keycloak.org:8443[https://my.keycloak.org:8443] in the given example. However, a reverse proxy will typically expose Keycloak at the default ports, e.g. `443`. In that case it’s desirable to specify the full URL in the `hostname` option rather than keeping the parts of the URL dynamic. The server can then be started with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As demonstrated in the previous example, the scheme and port are not explicitly required. In such cases, {project_name} automatically handles these aspects. For instance, the server would be accessible at `https://my.keycloak.org:8443` in the given example. However, a reverse proxy will typically expose Keycloak at the default ports, e.g. `443`. In that case it’s desirable to specify the full URL in the `hostname` option rather than keeping the parts of the URL dynamic. The server can then be started with:
```

[source,bash]
----
kc.sh start --hostname https://my.keycloak.org
----

Similarly, your reverse proxy might expose Keycloak at a different context path. It is possible to configure Keycloak to reflect that via the `--hostname` and `--hostname-admin` options. See the following example:

[source,bash]
----
kc.sh start --hostname https://my.keycloak.org:123/auth
----

> == Utilizing Internal URL for communication among clients

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Utilizing an internal URL for communication among clients
```

Keycloak has the capability to offer a separate URL for backchannel requests, enabling internal communication while maintaining the use of a public URL for frontchannel requests. Moreover, the backchannel is dynamically resolved based on incoming headers. Consider the following example:

[source,bash]
----
kc.sh start --hostname https://my.keycloak.org --hostname-backchannel-dynamic true
----

> In this manner, your applications, referred to as clients, can connect with {project_name} through your local network, while the server remains publicly accessible at https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this manner, your applications, referred to as clients, can connect with {project_name} through your local network, while the server remains publicly accessible at `https://my.keycloak.org`.
```

> In this manner, your applications, referred to as clients in Keycloak, can connect with Keycloak through your local network, while Keycloak itself remains publicly accessible at https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this manner, your applications, referred to as clients, can connect with {project_name} through your local network, while the server remains publicly accessible at https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org].
```

== Using edge TLS termination

> As you can observe, the HTTPS protocol is the default choice, adhering to {project_name}'s commitment to security best practices. However, {project_name} also provides the flexibility for users to opt for HTTP if necessary. This can be achieved simply by specifying the HTTP listener, consult the https://www.keycloak.org/server/enabletls[TLS guide] for details. With an edge TLS-termination proxy you can start the server as follows:

Reviewer: We should be able to use this format for links:
```suggestion
As you can observe, the HTTPS protocol is the default choice, adhering to {project_name}'s commitment to security best practices. However, {project_name} also provides the flexibility for users to opt for HTTP if necessary. This can be achieved simply by specifying the HTTP listener, consult the <@links.server id="enabletls"/> for details. With an edge TLS-termination proxy you can start the server as follows:
```

> As you can observe, the HTTPS protocol is the default choice, adhering to Keycloak's commitment to security best practices. However, Keycloak also provides the flexibility for users to opt for HTTP if necessary. This can be achieved simply by specifying the HTTP listener, consult the https://www.keycloak.org/server/enabletls[TLS guide] for details. Assume you have your TLS-termination proxy operational. You can initiate the server as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can observe, the HTTPS protocol is the default choice, adhering to {project_name}'s commitment to security best practices. However, {project_name} also provides the flexibility for users to opt for HTTP if necessary. This can be achieved simply by specifying the HTTP listener, consult the https://www.keycloak.org/server/enabletls[TLS guide] for details. With an edge TLS-termination proxy you can start the server as follows:
```

[source,bash]
----
kc.sh start --hostname https://my.keycloak.org --http-enabled true
----

> The result of this configuration is that you can continue to access {project_name} at https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org] via HTTPS, while the proxy interacts with the instance using HTTP and port `8080`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of this configuration is that you can continue to access {project_name} at `https://my.keycloak.org` via HTTPS, while the proxy interacts with the instance using HTTP and port `8080`.
```

> The result of this configuration is that you can continue to access Keycloak at https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org] via HTTPS, while the proxy interacts with the same Keycloak instance using HTTP and port `8080`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result of this configuration is that you can continue to access {project_name} at https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org] via HTTPS, while the proxy interacts with the instance using HTTP and port `8080`.
```

If key material is not provided won't the server just provide http in this scenario?

Author: The newly added note could clarify it a bit. The examples assume the production mode, so we rely on that the key is provided.

== Relying on a trusted proxy for the dynamic hostname resolution

If you fully trust your proxy, which correctly sets the Forwarded header, and you don't want to hardcode the hostname, Keycloak can accommodate this. You simply need to initiate the server as follows:

[source,bash]
----
kc.sh start --hostname-strict false --proxy-headers forwarded
----

With this configuration, the server respects the value set by the Forwarded header. This also implies that all endpoints are dynamically resolved.

The `--proxy-headers` option can be also used to resolve the URL partially dynamically when `--hostname` option is not specified as a full URL. For example:

[source,bash]
----
kc.sh start --hostname my.keycloak.org --proxy-headers forwarded
----

> In this case, scheme, port and context path are resolved dynamically from X-Forwarded-* headers, while hostname is statically defined as my.keycloak.org[my.keycloak.org].

Reviewer: I'd put some security note at the end of this section. Something like:
https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/811c70d1361c60dfd52abc7932a16715cd00a952/docs/guides/server/reverseproxy.adoc?plain=1#L25

Reviewer: @Pepo48 I believe this is still valid.

Author: Yes, it is, it slipped through as I was applying the suggestions through GH UI. Sorry for that, it is included now.

== Exposing the Administration Console on a separate hostname

If you wish to expose the Admin Console on a different host, you can do so with the following command:

[source,bash]
----
kc.sh start --hostname https://my.keycloak.org --hostname-admin https://admin.my.keycloak.org:8443
----

This allows you to access Keycloak at https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org] and the Keycloak Admin Console at https://admin.my.keycloak.org:8443[https://admin.my.keycloak.org:8443], while the backend continues to use https://my.keycloak.org[https://my.keycloak.org].

> NOTE: Keep in mind that none of the options that affect hostname or proxy settings are changing the ports on which the server actually is listening on (it changes only the ports of static resources like JavaScript and CSS links, OIDC well-known endpoints, redirect URIs, etc.). Therefore, you need to use https://www.keycloak.org/server/enabletls[HTTP configuration] options to change the Keycloak server to internally listen on a different port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Keep in mind that none of the options that affect hostname or proxy settings are changing the ports on which the server actually is listening on (it changes only the ports of static resources like JavaScript and CSS links, OIDC well-known endpoints, redirect URIs, etc.). Therefore, you need to use HTTP configuration options to change the Keycloak server to internally listen on a different port. Refer to the <@links.server id="all-config"/> for details.
```

== Sources for resolving the URL

As indicated in the previous sections, URLs can be resolved in several ways: they can be dynamically generated, hardcoded, or a combination of both:

* Dynamic from an incoming request:
** Host header, scheme, server port, context path
** Proxy-set headers: `Forwarded` and `X-Forwarded-*`
* Hardcoded:
** Server-wide config (e.g `--hostname`, `--hostname-admin`, etc.)
** Realm configuration for frontend URL

== Validations

* `--hostname` URL and `--hostname-admin` URL are verified that full URL is used, incl. scheme and hostname. Port is validated only if present, otherwise default port for given protocol is assumed (80 or 443).
* In production profile (`kc.sh|bat start`), either `--hostname` or `--hostname-strict` false must be explicitly configured.
** This does not apply for dev profile (`kc.sh|bat start-dev`) where `--hostname-strict false` is the default value.
* If `--hostname` is not configured:
** `--hostname-backchannel-dynamic` must be set to false.
** `--hostname-strict` must be set to false.

> * If `--hostname` is configured, --hostname-strict must be set to true.

Reviewer: This validation was in the end removed from the implementation:
https://github.com/vmuzikar/keycloak/blob/c34e8d06d4078725f402037652f32874c55842a0/services/src/main/java/org/keycloak/url/HostnameV2ProviderFactory.java#L53-L56

Author: Addressed.

> * If `--hostname-admin` is configured, `--hostname` must be set to a URL (not just hostname).
> * If `--hostname-backchannel-dynamic` is set to true, `--hostname` must be set to a URL (not just hostname).

Reviewer: We might want to justify these two a bit as they might to be as straightforward as the others.
```suggestion
* If `--hostname-admin` is configured, `--hostname` must be set to a URL (not just hostname). Otherwise {project_name} would not know what is the correct frontend URL (incl. port etc.) when accessing the Admin Console.
* If `--hostname-backchannel-dynamic` is set to true, `--hostname` must be set to a URL (not just hostname). Otherwise {project_name} would not know what is the correct frontend URL (incl. port etc.) when being access via the dynamically resolved bachchannel.
```

== Troubleshooting

To troubleshoot the hostname configuration, you can use a dedicated debug tool which can be enabled as:

.{project_name} configuration:
<@kc.start parameters="--hostname=mykeycloak --hostname-debug=true"/>

> After {project_name} starts properly, open your browser and go to:
> 
> `http://mykeycloak:8080/realms/<your-realm>/hostname-debug`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After {project_name} starts properly, open your browser and go to: `http://mykeycloak:8080/realms/<your-realm>/hostname-debug`
```
